README.md, before:

## Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models

This software project accompanies the research paper:
**[Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09009)**,
*Erik Wijmans, Brody Huval, Alexander Hertzberg, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl*.

![](assets/cce_figure.png)

As language models grow ever larger, so do their vocabularies. This has shifted the memory footprint of LLMs during training disproportionately to one single layer: the cross-entropy in the loss computation. Cross-entropy builds up a logit matrix with entries for each pair of input tokens and vocabulary items and, for small models, consumes an order of magnitude more memory than the rest of the LLM combined. We propose Cut Cross-Entropy (CCE), a method that computes the cross-entropy loss without materializing the logits for all tokens into global memory. Rather, CCE only computes the logit for the correct token and evaluates the log-sum-exp over all logits on the fly. We implement a custom kernel that performs the matrix multiplications and the log-sum-exp reduction over the vocabulary in flash memory, making global memory consumption for the cross-entropy computation negligible. This has a dramatic effect. Taking the Gemma 2 (2B) model as an example, CCE reduces the memory footprint of the loss computation from 24 GB to 1 MB, and the total training-time memory consumption of the classifier head from 28 GB to 1 GB. To improve the throughput of CCE, we leverage the inherent sparsity of softmax and propose to skip elements of the gradient computation that have a negligible (i.e., below numerical precision) contribution to the gradient. Experiments demonstrate that the dramatic reduction in memory consumption is accomplished without sacrificing training speed or convergence.

## Getting started

**Requirements**

1. Python 3.10+
2. PyTorch 2.4+
3. Triton 3.0+
4. Ampere (or newer) GPU


**Note:**  For operating systems that are not supported by Triton (e.g., MacOS), we include a highly optimized version of
linear-cross-entropy using `torch.compile`. This implementation will be set to the default on MacOS.

### Basic usage

**Installation**
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Usage**

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels)
```

In causal language modeling, it is common that the model embeddings and labels need to be shifted
such that the model predicts the next token.

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

shift_embeddings = embeddings[..., :-1, :].flatten(0, -2)
shift_labels = labels[..., 1:]

manual_shift_loss = linear_cross_entropy(shift_embeddings, classifier, shift_labels)
```

Instead, pass `shift=1` to perform this computation without allocating the shift_embeddings matrix.
```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

# This is the same as manual_shift_loss above
auto_shift_loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels, shift=1)
```

We also provide a highly optimized implementation of linear-cross-entropy loss using `torch.compile`.
This is a good option
for scenarios where speed is the primary goal and the model has a relatively small vocabulary compared to its
hidden dimension (when |V| >> D, `cce` will both save memory _and_ be faster).
This option also works on the CPU and older GPUs, making it useful for testing.

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels, ..., impl="torch_compile")
```


There are several other implementations available depending on your needs.

| impl | Description |
|------|-------------|
| cce  | The CCE implementation as described in the paper. This is may be the fastest and uses the least amount of memory. Generally recommended to start here. |
| torch_compile | A highly optimized `torch.compile` implementation. This is typically the fastest but uses the most amount of memory. Good as a reference and for systems that don't support Triton. |
| cce_kahan | Uses Kahan summation (or fp32) to improve numerical precision. This comes at the cost of more memory usage (albeit only a temporary buffer in the backward pass). This is useful for long sequence lengths or if the model is particularly sensitive to numerical imprecision.
| cce_kahan_full_c | Same as cce_kahan and removes gradient filtering on the classifier gradient. This is useful for pretraining but will be slower.
| cce_kahan_full_c_full_e (cce_exact) | This additionally removes gradient filtering from the embedding gradient. This is useful as a reference point/sanity check. |


### Vocabulary Parallelism

We also support computing linear cross-entropy loss for classifier weights sharded
along the vocabulary dimensions. To use this, provided a `VocabParallelOptions` instance
to `linear_cross_entropy`. This takes 3 parameters, the `start` and `stop` indices of this rank's
shard, and the `torch.distributed.ProcessGroup` for this rank's vocab parallel group.



```python
import torch

from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy, VocabParallelOptions

# The vocab parallel group for this rank.
#  This group can be created/retrieved in many different ways,
# for instance,
# torch.distributed.new_group(...)
# device_mesh.get_group(mesh_dim="model_parallel")
# etc
vp_group = ...


embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
vp_classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

vp_start, vp_stop = model.get_classifier_range()
vp_opts = VocabParallelOptions(vp_start, vp_stop, group=vp_group)

# alternatively, there is an option to create this
# by linearly dividing the vocab across ranks
vp_opts = VocabParallelOptions.from_vocab(model.vocab_size, group=vp_group)

# All ranks in the vocab parallel group will return the same loss
loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, vp_classifier, labels, ...,
  vocab_parallel_options=vp_opts)

loss.backward()

# All ranks will compute the same embeddings.grad, but each rank will have only the classifier gradient
# corresponding to its part of the full classifier matrix (as defined by vp_classifier).
```



### Computing Related Quantities

`linear_cross_entropy` can be used as an efficient way to compute the negative log likelihood
of a specified token. This can be used to compute various quantities.


```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy


# linear_cross_entropy computes negative log likelihood for a target token
nll = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, target_token, reduction="none")

# Perplexity
ppl = torch.exp(nll.mean(-1))

# DPO (beta and reference omitted)
dpo_loss = -F.logsigmoid(nll[dispreferred].sum(-1) - nll[preferred].sum(-1))

# PPO
ppo_loss = -torch.minimum(toch.exp(-nll - old_logp) * adv, adv + eps * adv.abs())
```


### Generalized Usage

While we have discussed using CCE in the context of large language models, the only constraint
to use CCE is that loss can be formulated using something that resembles following:

```python
logits = X @ A.T + b  # (b is an optional bias)
loss = F.cross_entropy(logits.float(), targets)
```

Given that format, CCE can then be used as
```python
loss = linear_cross_entropy(X, A, target_token, bias=b)
```

This is a very general and encompasses vision models, contrastive losses, e.g. CLIP, etc.


### Transformers Integration

**Installation**

Install cut-cross-entropy with transformers dependencies
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy[transformers] @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Usage**

If you are using transformers, you can patch transformers to use CCE directly. Note that
logits will no longer be returned (`None` will be returned instead).
```python
from cut_cross_entropy.transformers import cce_patch

cce_patch("llama")

# or

model = ...
model = cce_patch(model)
```

We currently support the Llama, Phi3, Mistral, and Gemma2 families of models.

`cce_patch` takes two options. The first is the linear-cross-entropy implementation to use. Currently `"cce"` or `"torch_compile"`.

The second
is the loss reduction. We support `"mean"`, `"sum"`, and `"none"`, that mirror their PyTorch counterpart.
`"mean"` is the default and what the transformers trainer API expects.
However,
`"none"` in particular can enable for efficient computation of quantities based on the loss.

For example, the following efficiently computes the perplexity of a batch of sequences:
```python
import transformers

from cut_cross_entropy.transformers import cce_patch


model = transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(...)

model = cce_patch(model, reduction="none")

labels = input_ids.clone()
labels[~attention_mask] = -100 # -100 is the ignore index for PyTorch and CCE.

outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask, labels=labels)

loss = outputs[0] # A (B, T - 1) tensor because reduction="none". T - 1 because the first input token has
# no loss.

ppl = torch.exp(
    # [:, 1:] because the first token has no loss
    loss.sum(1) / (labels[:, 1:] != -100).count_nonzero(dim=1)
).mean()  # Average perplexity over the batch
```



### Training and reproducing the benchmark results

We provide a training in `training/train.py`.

**Installation**
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy[all] @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Training**

Use `scripts/train.sh` to train a full model.

**Benchmarking**

The benchmark script can be run via `python -m benchmark`.

Expected output with A100 SMX4, PyTorch 2.4.1, and CUDA 12.4.

```
          method        kind  runtime_ms  op_mem_mb test_data
0            cce     loss-fw        46.4        1.1    gemma2
1  torch_compile     loss-fw        49.9     4000.1    gemma2
2       baseline     loss-fw        81.9    24000.0    gemma2
3            cce     loss-bw        89.3     1163.0    gemma2
4  torch_compile     loss-bw        92.3    12000.0    gemma2
5       baseline     loss-bw       122.4    16000.0    gemma2
6            cce  loss-fw-bw       134.8     1164.0    gemma2
7  torch_compile  loss-fw-bw       144.0    16000.1    gemma2
8       baseline  loss-fw-bw       208.8    28000.0    gemma2
```

### Development

If dependencies are installed locally, `cut-cross-entropy` will work without a pip install as long as `python` is executed in the root path of the github repo.

To install directly from the github repo, either use an (editable) install or manipulate PYTHONPATH, e.g.

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# or
pip install ".[dev]"

# or
export PYTHONPATH=/path/to/ml-cross-entropy:${PYTHONPATH}
```

## Citation

```
@inproceedings{wijmans2025cut,
  author       = {Erik Wijmans and
                  Brody Huval and
                  Alexander Hertzberg and
                  Vladlen Koltun and
                  Philipp Kr\"ahenb\"uhl},
  title        = {Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models},
  booktitle    = {International Conference on Learning Representations},
  year         = {2025},
}
```


## License
This sample code is released under the [LICENSE](LICENSE) terms.

## Acknowledgements

Our codebase is built using multiple opensource contributions, please see [Acknowledgements](ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.md) for more details.

Please check the paper for a complete list of references and datasets used in this work.

Commit message:

port Enable backward in fp32 for Triton >= 3.2

README.md, after:

## Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models

This software project accompanies the research paper:
**[Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09009)**,
*Erik Wijmans, Brody Huval, Alexander Hertzberg, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl*.

![](assets/cce_figure.png)

As language models grow ever larger, so do their vocabularies. This has shifted the memory footprint of LLMs during training disproportionately to one single layer: the cross-entropy in the loss computation. Cross-entropy builds up a logit matrix with entries for each pair of input tokens and vocabulary items and, for small models, consumes an order of magnitude more memory than the rest of the LLM combined. We propose Cut Cross-Entropy (CCE), a method that computes the cross-entropy loss without materializing the logits for all tokens into global memory. Rather, CCE only computes the logit for the correct token and evaluates the log-sum-exp over all logits on the fly. We implement a custom kernel that performs the matrix multiplications and the log-sum-exp reduction over the vocabulary in flash memory, making global memory consumption for the cross-entropy computation negligible. This has a dramatic effect. Taking the Gemma 2 (2B) model as an example, CCE reduces the memory footprint of the loss computation from 24 GB to 1 MB, and the total training-time memory consumption of the classifier head from 28 GB to 1 GB. To improve the throughput of CCE, we leverage the inherent sparsity of softmax and propose to skip elements of the gradient computation that have a negligible (i.e., below numerical precision) contribution to the gradient. Experiments demonstrate that the dramatic reduction in memory consumption is accomplished without sacrificing training speed or convergence.

## Getting started

**Requirements**

1. Python 3.10+
2. PyTorch 2.4+
3. Triton 3.0+
4. Ampere (or newer) GPU


**Note:**  For operating systems that are not supported by Triton (e.g., MacOS), we include a highly optimized version of
linear-cross-entropy using `torch.compile`. This implementation will be set to the default on MacOS.

### Basic usage

**Installation**
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Usage**

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels)
```

In causal language modeling, it is common that the model embeddings and labels need to be shifted
such that the model predicts the next token.

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

shift_embeddings = embeddings[..., :-1, :].flatten(0, -2)
shift_labels = labels[..., 1:]

manual_shift_loss = linear_cross_entropy(shift_embeddings, classifier, shift_labels)
```

Instead, pass `shift=1` to perform this computation without allocating the shift_embeddings matrix.
```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

# This is the same as manual_shift_loss above
auto_shift_loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels, shift=1)
```

We also provide a highly optimized implementation of linear-cross-entropy loss using `torch.compile`.
This is a good option
for scenarios where speed is the primary goal and the model has a relatively small vocabulary compared to its
hidden dimension (when |V| >> D, `cce` will both save memory _and_ be faster).
This option also works on the CPU and older GPUs, making it useful for testing.

```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy

embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, labels, ..., impl="torch_compile")
```


There are several other implementations available depending on your needs.

| impl | Description |
|------|-------------|
| cce  | The CCE implementation as described in the paper. This is may be the fastest and uses the least amount of memory. Generally recommended to start here. |
| torch_compile | A highly optimized `torch.compile` implementation. This is typically the fastest but uses the most amount of memory. Good as a reference and for systems that don't support Triton. |
| cce_kahan | Uses Kahan summation (or fp32) to improve numerical precision. This comes at the cost of more memory usage (albeit only a temporary buffer in the backward pass). This is useful for long sequence lengths or if the model is particularly sensitive to numerical imprecision.
| cce_kahan_full_c | Same as cce_kahan and removes gradient filtering on the classifier gradient. This is useful for pretraining but will be slower.
| cce_kahan_full_c_full_e (cce_exact) | This additionally removes gradient filtering from the embedding gradient. This is useful as a reference point/sanity check. |


### Numerical Stability

The CCE kernel is designed to work with bf16/fp16 inputs and provides good numerical stability for most use cases. However, for models with very large vocabularies or very long sequence lengths, you may want to consider using the `cce_kahan` implementation which uses Kahan summation (or fp32 accumulation for Triton >= 3.2) to improve numerical precision. This comes at the cost of more memory usage but can be beneficial for training stability.


### Vocabulary Parallelism

We also support computing linear cross-entropy loss for classifier weights sharded
along the vocabulary dimensions. To use this, provided a `VocabParallelOptions` instance
to `linear_cross_entropy`. This takes 3 parameters, the `start` and `stop` indices of this rank's
shard, and the `torch.distributed.ProcessGroup` for this rank's vocab parallel group.



```python
import torch

from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy, VocabParallelOptions

# The vocab parallel group for this rank.
#  This group can be created/retrieved in many different ways,
# for instance,
# torch.distributed.new_group(...)
# device_mesh.get_group(mesh_dim="model_parallel")
# etc
vp_group = ...


embeddings = model.compute_embedding(inputs)
vp_classifier = model.get_classifier_weights()

vp_start, vp_stop = model.get_classifier_range()
vp_opts = VocabParallelOptions(vp_start, vp_stop, group=vp_group)

# alternatively, there is an option to create this
# by linearly dividing the vocab across ranks
vp_opts = VocabParallelOptions.from_vocab(model.vocab_size, group=vp_group)

# All ranks in the vocab parallel group will return the same loss
loss = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, vp_classifier, labels, ...,
  vocab_parallel_options=vp_opts)

loss.backward()

# All ranks will compute the same embeddings.grad, but each rank will have only the classifier gradient
# corresponding to its part of the full classifier matrix (as defined by vp_classifier).
```



### Computing Related Quantities

`linear_cross_entropy` can be used as an efficient way to compute the negative log likelihood
of a specified token. This can be used to compute various quantities.


```python
from cut_cross_entropy import linear_cross_entropy


# linear_cross_entropy computes negative log likelihood for a target token
nll = linear_cross_entropy(embeddings, classifier, target_token, reduction="none")

# Perplexity
ppl = torch.exp(nll.mean(-1))

# DPO (beta and reference omitted)
dpo_loss = -F.logsigmoid(nll[dispreferred].sum(-1) - nll[preferred].sum(-1))

# PPO
ppo_loss = -torch.minimum(toch.exp(-nll - old_logp) * adv, adv + eps * adv.abs())
```


### Generalized Usage

While we have discussed using CCE in the context of large language models, the only constraint
to use CCE is that loss can be formulated using something that resembles following:

```python
logits = X @ A.T + b  # (b is an optional bias)
loss = F.cross_entropy(logits.float(), targets)
```

Given that format, CCE can then be used as
```python
loss = linear_cross_entropy(X, A, target_token, bias=b)
```

This is a very general and encompasses vision models, contrastive losses, e.g. CLIP, etc.


### Transformers Integration

**Installation**

Install cut-cross-entropy with transformers dependencies
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy[transformers] @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Usage**

If you are using transformers, you can patch transformers to use CCE directly. Note that
logits will no longer be returned (`None` will be returned instead).
```python
from cut_cross_entropy.transformers import cce_patch

cce_patch("llama")

# or

model = ...
model = cce_patch(model)
```

We currently support the Llama, Phi3, Mistral, and Gemma2 families of models.

`cce_patch` takes two options. The first is the linear-cross-entropy implementation to use. Currently `"cce"` or `"torch_compile"`.

The second
is the loss reduction. We support `"mean"`, `"sum"`, and `"none"`, that mirror their PyTorch counterpart.
`"mean"` is the default and what the transformers trainer API expects.
However,
`"none"` in particular can enable for efficient computation of quantities based on the loss.

For example, the following efficiently computes the perplexity of a batch of sequences:
```python
import transformers

from cut_cross_entropy.transformers import cce_patch


model = transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained(...)

model = cce_patch(model, reduction="none")

labels = input_ids.clone()
labels[~attention_mask] = -100 # -100 is the ignore index for PyTorch and CCE.

outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask, labels=labels)

loss = outputs[0] # A (B, T - 1) tensor because reduction="none". T - 1 because the first input token has
# no loss.

ppl = torch.exp(
    # [:, 1:] because the first token has no loss
    loss.sum(1) / (labels[:, 1:] != -100).count_nonzero(dim=1)
).mean()  # Average perplexity over the batch
```



### Training and reproducing the benchmark results

We provide a training in `training/train.py`.

**Installation**
```bash
pip install "cut-cross-entropy[all] @ git+https://github.com/apple/ml-cross-entropy.git"
```

**Training**

Use `scripts/train.sh` to train a full model.

**Benchmarking**

The benchmark script can be run via `python -m benchmark`.

Expected output with A100 SMX4, PyTorch 2.4.1, and CUDA 12.4.

```
          method        kind  runtime_ms  op_mem_mb test_data
0            cce     loss-fw        46.4        1.1    gemma2
1  torch_compile     loss-fw        49.9     4000.1    gemma2
2       baseline     loss-fw        81.9    24000.0    gemma2
3            cce     loss-bw        89.3     1163.0    gemma2
4  torch_compile     loss-bw        92.3    12000.0    gemma2
5       baseline     loss-bw       122.4    16000.0    gemma2
6            cce  loss-fw-bw       134.8     1164.0    gemma2
7  torch_compile  loss-fw-bw       144.0    16000.1    gemma2
8       baseline  loss-fw-bw       208.8    28000.0    gemma2
```

### Development

If dependencies are installed locally, `cut-cross-entropy` will work without a pip install as long as `python` is executed in the root path of the github repo.

To install directly from the github repo, either use an (editable) install or manipulate PYTHONPATH, e.g.

```bash
pip install -e ".[dev]"

# or
pip install ".[dev]"

# or
export PYTHONPATH=/path/to/ml-cross-entropy:${PYTHONPATH}
```

## Citation

```
@inproceedings{wijmans2025cut,
  author       = {Erik Wijmans and
                  Brody Huval and
                  Alexander Hertzberg and
                  Vladlen Koltun and
                  Philipp Kr\"ahenb\"uhl},
  title        = {Cut Your Losses in Large-Vocabulary Language Models},
  booktitle    = {International Conference on Learning Representations},
  year         = {2025},
}
```


## License
This sample code is released under the [LICENSE](LICENSE) terms.

## Acknowledgements

Our codebase is built using multiple opensource contributions, please see [Acknowledgements](ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.md) for more details.

Please check the paper for a complete list of references and datasets used in this work.
